
Specific Aim 2: Use forward genetic simulations to model the evolutionary arms race between TEs and piRNAs

2.1 Develop a simulation framework to model TE sequence evolution and piRNA silencing
I propose to use SLiM, an agent-based, forward genetics simulation software, to create a model of the TE-host arms race. The number, and diversity of TEs and piRNAs change over time in a population, and these changes are heritable, which makes an agent-based approach appropriate9,17,18,24. In this model we will simulate a TE invasion in a diploid, sexually reproducing population of constant and finite size with TE insertions having an additive, weakly deleterious effect on host fitness. Previous models have attempted to capture either TE sequence evolution, or the effects of piRNA silencing16,25,30,31,41,42. However, my approach will marry both in order to model the TE-host arms race. The arms race that I am modelling includes three processes: 
TEs evolve by diverging from ancestral sequence. As TEs replicate within the population they may diverge in sequence according to a specified mutation rate. The effect that these mutations have on transposition rate of the TE will be drawn from a distribution that reflects both deleterious mutations that disrupt transposase function, and neutral mutations that do not. The sequences of the TEs will be recorded as the simulation progresses so that genealogies of the TEs can be easily constructed, and divergence may be calculated. 
piRNA loci limit TE transposition rates upon TE insertion. I will include a single non-recombining piRNA locus in the genome of the hosts that TEs will be able to insert into. Once a TE has inserted into this piRNA locus it can then be used to silence other TEs. This silencing will be a function of two parameters specified in the simulations: strength and specificity. The strength of the piRNA silencing will determine, at the baseline, how strong the reduction in transposition of TEs will be. The specificity, on the other hand, will determine how effective a piRNA loci will be in silencing a wide variety of TE sequences. 
TE sequence divergence reduces effectiveness of piRNA silencing. The consequence of having a piRNA loci with a specificity and allowing TEs to mutate is that individual TEs will not be silenced uniformly. How reduced the transposition rate of a given TE is will be a function of the specificity of the piRNA locus, the initial strength of silencing, and how diverged this TE is to the TE inserted at the piRNA locus. This is the crux of the TE-host arms race model that I have proposed. 

2.2 Use framework to explore simulations.
Exploration of parameters. Once the model has been constructed, I will perform a systematic exploration of the parameters. The goal of this exploration is to find the parameter space in which a TE-host arms race relationship can be observed. If our arms race model is satisfied, we should see a great deal of sequence diversity of TEs, and heterogeneity of transposition rates among TEs. The sets of relevant parameters to explore will likely be: piRNA initial strength, piRNA specificity, TE mutation rate, TE transposition and excision rate, and TE fitness. I predict that piRNA specificity, and TE mutation rate will be the most important parameters for the arms race model as they will likely dictate the rate at which the TEs evolve to evade silencing. The competition between TEs is likely to be influenced by the TE fitness effects, transposition rate, and excision rate. I predict that in simulations where the fitness effects of TEs is sufficiently deleterious and there is a non-zero rate of excision, there will be stronger competition between TEs, and the effect of the differences in transposition rates will be seen more clearly.
Analysis of phylogenies, rates of transposition, subfamily emergence and replacement. Using sets of parameters that can produce an arms race I will then analyze several features of the TEs evolution. Firstly, I will reconstruct the phylogeny of the simulated TEs from genealogical information recorded during the simulation. In previous models of TE sequence evolution, phylogenetic analysis reveals distinct monomorphic, and dimorphic phases42. In the arms race model, these dimorphic, or polymorphic phases may be more prevalent than had been modelled previously. Secondly, I will record the number of transpositions per generation to look at the changes in transposition rate across simulation time. Under our arms race I predict seeing bursts of transposition that correspond to TEs that manage to break away from the piRNA silencing. These bursts would be followed by insertion into a piRNA cluster, and silencing. I will determine what sets of parameters can lead to repeated bursts of transposition, and how often these cycles can repeat. Do transposition rates eventually fall to a flat level, or can TEs evolve continuously to avoid piRNAs?  Finally, I will record which TE variants are occupying the genomes of individuals over simulation time to infer the rates at which new subfamilies of TEs emerge, expand through a population, and replace the older TE insertions. 
Effects of migration on populations of TEs. The above simulations will be performed with a single population in panmixia. However, in real populations there is structure, and subdivision. It has been proposed that subdivisions in populations can lead to the emergence of highly diverged TE subfamilies, and, if given enough time, reproductive isolation between the populations43. Using parameters of the simulation that produce an arms race model, I will simulate two populations with various rates of migration in order to test what effect subdivision has on TE variation. I predict that long periods of isolation between two populations, and then subsequent resumption of migration will cause TE invaders to rapidly spread from one population to the other.  

Alternative approach: 
Branching process. If the above SLiM model proves to be too complex to implement efficiently then I will use a simpler analytical model, known as a branching process. In a branching process TEs will generate “clones” of themselves across evolutionary time, with some rate of mutation. When a new mutation arises, a new branch is formed, and this new mutant TE will iterate through this process further44. This analytical model has been successful in modeling the family structure of Alu elements, and may be adaptable to this hypothesis45.